The bluethroat (Luscinia svecica) is a small passerine bird that was formerly classed as a member of the thrush family Turdidae, but is now known to be an Old World flycatcher, in the family Muscicapidae. It, and similar small European species, are often called chats.

It is a migratory insectivorous species breeding in wet birch wood or bushy swamp in Europe and across the Palearctic with a foothold in western Alaska. It nests in tussocks or low in dense bushes. It winters in the Iberian Peninsula, the northern half of Africa, and in southern Asia (among others including the Indian subcontinent).

The bluethroat is similar in size to the European robin at 13–14 cm. It is plain brown above except for the distinctive tail, brown with black outer corners and red basal side patches. It has a strong white supercilium. The males have a striking throat pattern, with a vivid glossy blue throat bordered below with (usually) a narrow black band (but see subspecies, below), and a broad brick-red band below that; additionally there is often a central spot, either red or white, in the middle of the blue throat; see subspecies below for details. Despite the distinctive appearance of the males, recent genetic studies show only limited variation between the forms, and confirm that this is a single species. Moult begins in July after breeding and is completed in 40–45 days, before the birds migrate.

The male has a varied and very imitative song. Its call is a typical chat chack noise.

The bluethroat was formally described in 1758 by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in the tenth edition of his Systema Naturae under the binomial name Motacilla svecica. Linnaeus specified the type locality as "Europae alpinis" (Alpine Europe) but this was restricted to Sweden and Lapland by German orthithologist Ernst Hartert in 1910. The specific epithet svecica is Modern Latin meaning "Swedish". The bluethroat is now one of four species placed in the genus Luscinia that was introduced in 1817 by the English naturalist Thomas Forster.

Eleven subspecies are currently accepted by IOC, but only seven by Shirihai. They differ in the extent and intensity of the blue on the throat in the males, whether the blue contains a central spot or not, and if it does, the colour of the spot; they also differ significantly in their breeding habitat and ecology.

The male plumage is brightest in spring and summer; after the summer moult, the fresh new feathers have pale tips which obscure the throat pattern. These tips then abrade in late winter and early spring to reveal the brigher bases of the feathers. Females of all subspecies usually have just a blackish crescent and very limited blue on an otherwise cream throat and breast, though older individuals can develop more strongly male-like plumage. They are not currently known to be distinguishable to subspecies on plumage, except for individuals with the most male-like plumage (females of the small L. s. namnetum and large L. s. magna can be identified on careful measurement). Newly fledged juveniles are freckled and spotted dark brown above and below for a few weeks after fledging, then moulting to first-winter plumage, in which both sexes resemble adult females (and like them, are not identifiable to subspecies).

A disjunct population of L. s. svecica also breeds at high altitudes in the northern Carpathian Mountains in the Czech Republic, altitudinally and ecologically separated from L. s. cyanecula at low levels in the same area; these birds migrate to India in winter like other L. s. svecica, not to Africa as L. s. cyanecula.