The violet-capped hummingbird (Goldmania violiceps) is a Near Threatened species of hummingbird in the "emeralds", tribe Trochilini of subfamily Trochilinae. It is found in Panama and far northwestern Colombia.

The violet-capped hummingbird is monotypic. It shares it genus with the Pirre hummingbird.

The violet-capped hummingbird is 8.5 to 9.5 cm (3.3 to 3.7 in) long. Males weigh 3.8 to 4.4 g (0.13 to 0.16 oz) and females 3.4 to 3.9 g (0.12 to 0.14 oz). Both sexes have a straight bill that is mostly black with a pink base to the mandible. The male's crown is iridescent violet-blue and most of the rest of the body is metallic green. Its tail is slightly forked and maroon with wide white edges to the feathers. The female has green upperparts and whitish underparts with gray spots on the throat and green ones along the side. Its tail feathers are maroon with white tips.

The violet-capped hummingbird is found in several unconnected mountainous areas in central and eastern Panama and extreme northwestern Colombia. It inhabits the edges and interior of humid forest between the elevations of 600 and 1,200 m (2,000 and 3,900 ft) and is most common at around 900 m (3,000 ft).

The violet-capped hummingbird is a year-round resident throughout its range.

The violet-capped hummingbird forages for nectar in dense undergrowth, feeding mainly on low flowering shrubs like Salvia, Pachystachis, Palicourea and Psammisia.

The violet-capped hummingbird's breeding season appears to span at least from December to April, but nothing else is known about its breeding phenology. Its nest has not been described.

The violet-capped hummingbird's song is "a low, rapid chirping." Its call is "a series of irregularly repeated, very nasal and fairly low-pitched notes, 'kyek...kyek-kyek-kyek...kyek...'" that is typically given while hovering or feeding.

The IUCN originally assessed the violet-capped hummingbird as being of Least Concern but since 2017 has rated it Near Threatened. It has a small range; its population size is not known and is believed to be decreasing. "A slow amount of deforestation may be threatening this species, but much of this habitat has not been affected by man yet." It is considered fairly common to locally common.